Tyler's pushing a gun in my mouth and saying, the first step to eternal life is you have to die.
"We really won't die."
"This isn't really death," Tyler says. "We'll be legend. We won't grow old."
That old saying, how you always kill the one you love, well, look, it works both ways.
While desks and filing cabinets and computers meteor down on the crowd around the building and smoke funnels up from the broken windows and three blocks down the street the demolition team watches the clock, I know all of this: the gun, the anarchy, the explosion is really about Marla Singer.
Where would Jesus be if no one had written the gospels?
It's easy to cry when you realize that everyone you love will reject you or die.
On a long enough time line, the survival rate for everyone will drop to zero.
Losing all hope was freedom.
If I didn't say anything, people in a group assumed the worst. They cried harder. I cried harder. Look up into the stars and you're gone.
The charm of traveling is everywhere I go, tiny life. I go to the hotel, tiny soap, tiny shampoos, single-serving butter, tiny mouthwash and a single-use toothbrush. Fold into the standard airplane seat. You're a giant.
This is your life, and it's ending one minute at a time.
One minute was enough, Tyler said, a person had to work hard for it, but a minute of perfection was worth the effort. A moment was the most you could ever expect from perfection.
All her life, she never saw a dead person. There was no real sense of life because she had nothing to contrast it with. Oh, but now there was dying and death and loss and grief. Weeping and shuddering, terror and remorse. Now that she knows where we're all going, Marla feels every moment of her life.
Everything, including your set of handblown green glass dishes with the tiny bubbles and imperfections, little bits of sand, proof they were crafted by the honest, simple, hardworking indigenous aboriginal peoples of wherever, well, these dishes all get blown out by the blast.
The people I know who used to sit in the bathroom with pornography, now they sit in the bathroom with their IKEA furniture catalogue.
You buy furniture. You tell yourself, this is the last sofa I will ever need in my life. Buy the sofa, then for a couple years you're satisfied that no matter what goes wrong, at least you've got your sofa issue handled. Then the right set of dishes. Then the perfect bed. The drapes. The rug. Then you're trapped in your lovely nest, and the things you used to own, now they own you.
Deliver me from Swedish furniture. Deliver me from clever art.
"If you don't know what you want," the doorman said, "you end up with a lot you don't."
May I never be complete. May I never be content. May I never be perfect.
"I want you to hit me as hard as you can."
You can swallow about a pint of blood before you're sick.
The first rule about fight club is you don't talk about fight club.
I tell Walter I fell. I did this to myself.
I did this to myself.
I just don't want to die without a few scars, I say.
The second rule about fight club is you don't talk about fight club.
You don't say anything because fight club exists only in the hours between when fight club starts and when fight club ends.
You saw the kid who works in the copy center, a month ago you saw this kid who can't remember to threeholepunch an order or put colored slip sheets between the copy packets, but this kid was a god for ten minutes when you saw him kick the air out of an account representative twice his size then land on the man and pound him limp until the kid had to stop.
That's the third rule in fight club, when someone says stop, or goes limp, even if he's just faking it, the fight is over. Every time you see this kid, you can't tell him what a great fight he had.
Only two guys to a fight. One fight at a time. They fight without shirts or shoes. The fights go on as long as they have to. Those are the other rules of fight club.
Who guys are in fight club is not who they are in the real world. Even if you told the kid in the copy center that he had a good fight, you wouldn't be talking to the same man.
Who I am in fight club is not someone my boss knows.
After a night in fight club, everything in the real world gets the volume turned down.
Nothing can piss you off. Your word is law, and if other people break that law or question you, even that doesn't piss you off.
Someday I'd be dead without a scar and there would be a really nice condo and car.
Nothing is static. Even the Mona Lisa is falling apart.
Since fight club, I can wiggle half the teeth in my jaw.
Maybe selfimprovement isn't the answer.
Tyler never knew his father.
Maybe selfdestruction is the answer.
My dad, he starts a new family in a new town about every six years. This isn't so much like a family as it's like he sets up a franchise.
The gyms you go to are crowded with guys trying to look like men, as if being a man means looking the way a sculptor or an art director says.
Like Tyler says, even a snuffle looks pumped.
What you see at fight club is a generation of men raised by women.
"And the seventh rule," Tyler yells, "is if this is your first night at fight club, you have to fight."
My father never went to college so it was really important I go to college. After college, I called him long distance and said, now what? My dad didn't know. When I got a job and turned twenty-five, long distance, I said, now what? My dad didn't know, so he said, get married. I'm a thirty-year-old boy, and I'm wondering if another woman is really the answer I need.
What happens at fight club doesn't happen in words.
And after I said, stop, I could look down and there was a print of half my face in blood on the floor.
You aren't alive anywhere like you're alive at fight club.
Fight club isn't about winning or losing fights.
Fight club isn't about words.
There's grunting and noise at fight club like at the gym, but fight club isn't about looking good.
There's hysterical shouting in tongues like at church, and when you wake up Sunday afternoon you feel saved.
After my last fight, the guy who fought me mopped the floor while I called my insurance to preapprove a visit to the emergency room.
When we invented fight club, Tyler and I, neither of us had ever been in a fight before.
If you've never been in a fight, you wonder. About getting hurt, about what you're capable of doing against another man.
At the time, my life just seemed too complete, and maybe we have to break everything to make something better out of ourselves.
I asked Tyler what he'd been fighting. Tyler said, his father.
Maybe we didn't need a father to complete ourselves. There's nothing personal about who you fight in fight club. You fight to fight.
Most guys are at fight club because of something they're too scared to fight.
Now I go to meetings or conferences and see faces at conference tables, accountants and junior executives or attorneys with broken noses spreading out like an eggplant under the edges of bandages or they have a couple stitches under an eye or a jaw wired shut.
And maybe Walter's thinking about a meatless, painfree potluck he went to last weekend or the ozone or the Earth's desperate need to stop cruel product testing on animals, but probably he's not.
Now, according to the ancient Chinese custom we all learned from television, Tyler is responsible for Marla, forever, because Tyler saved Marla's life.
The girl is infectious human waste, and she's confused and afraid to commit to the wrong thing so she won't commit to anything.
I am Joe's Clenching Bowels.
My boss sends me home because of all the dried blood on my pants, and I am overjoyed.
Until today, it really pissed me off that I'd become this totally centered Zen Master and nobody had noticed.
Still, I'm doing the little FAX thing. I write little HAIKU things and FAX them around to everyone.
When I pass people in the hall at work, I get totally ZEN right in everyone's hostile little FACE.
Worker bees can leave / Even drones can fly away / The queen is their slave
You give up all your worldly possessions and your car and go live in a rented house in the toxic waste part of town where late at night, you can hear Marla and Tyler in his room, calling each other human butt wipe.
HELLO! Look at me. HELLO! I am so ZEN. This is BLOOD. This is NOTHING. Hello. Everything is nothing, and it's so cool to be ENLIGHTENED. Like me.
Without just one nest / A bird can call the world home / Life is your career
So I can wash the pants, Tyler has to show me how to make soap.
"At the Pressman Hotel, if you can work in the evening," Tyler says. "The job will stoke your class hatred."
"To make soap, first we have to render fat."
Put the fat in the water, and get the water boiling.
Tyler only says this to make me feel better. The truth is I like my boss.
"Sticking feathers up your butt," Tyler says, "does not make you a chicken."
As the fat renders, the tallow will float to the surface of the boiling water.
Turn down the heat under the pan.
More and more tallow will rise until the water is skinned over with a rainbow motherofpearl layer. Use a big spoon to skim the layer off, and set this layer aside.
Tyler says, "At least Marla's trying to hit bottom."
Keep skimming until no more tallow rises. This is tallow we're skimming off the water. Good clean tallow.
Tyler says I'm nowhere near hitting the bottom, yet. And if I don't fall all the way, I can't be saved.
I shouldn't just abandon money and property and knowledge. This isn't just a weekend retreat. I should run from selfimprovement, and I should be running toward disaster. I can't just play it safe anymore.
"It's only after you've lost everything," Tyler says, "that you're free to do anything."
When the fat's boiled enough that no more tallow rises, throw out the boiling water. Wash the pot and fill it with clean water.
"Where you're at, now," Tyler says, "you can't even imagine what the bottom will be like."
"The fat we're using has a lot of salt in it," Tyler says. "Too much salt and your soap won't get solid." Boil and skim.
I am Joe's Boiling Point.
Marla grabs my sleeve and holds me in one place for the second it takes to kiss my cheek.
As I fill the milk cartons with tallow, Tyler puts them in the fridge.
A layer of something thick and clear is collecting on top of the tallow in the fridge.
"The clear layer is glycerin. You can mix the glycerin back in when you make soap. Or, you can skim the glycerin off."
"This is a chemical burn," Tyler said, "and it will hurt more than you've ever been burned."
Tyler's saliva did two jobs. The wet kiss on the back of my hand held the flakes of lye while they burned. That was the first job. The second was lye only burns when you combine it with water. Or saliva.
A paste of lye and water can burn through an aluminum pan.
"Because everything up to now is a story," Tyler says, "and everything after now is a story." This is the greatest moment of our life.
"Come back to the pain," Tyler says.
"Don't shut this out," Tyler says. "Soap and human sacrifice go hand in hand."
"You can go to the sink and run water over your hand, but first you have to know that you're stupid and you will die. Look at me. Someday," Tyler says, "you will die, and until you know that, you're useless to me."
After hundreds of people were sacrificed and burned, Tyler says, a thick white discharge crept from the altar, downhill to the river.
"This is the greatest moment of your life," Tyler says, "and you're off somewhere missing it."
Cultures without soap, Tyler says, they used their urine and the urine of their dogs to wash their clothes and hair because of the uric acid and ammonia.
"You have to see," Tyler says, "how the first soap was made of heroes."
"Rain," Tyler says, "fell on the burnt pyre year after year, and year after year, people were burned, and the rain seeped through the wood ashes to become a solution of lye, and the lye combined with the melted fat of the sacrifices, and a thick white discharge of soap crept out from the base of the altar and crept downhill toward the river."
The giants, they'll send something back to the kitchen for no reason at all. They just want to see you run around for their money.
Tyler and me, we've turned into the guerrilla terrorists of the service industry. Dinner party saboteurs.
"I have passed an amount of urine into at least one of your many elegant fragrances."
Loud and fast, Tyler says how they kill whales, Tyler says, to make that perfume that costs more than gold per ounce. Most people have never seen a whale.
"Getting fired," Tyler says, "is the best thing that could happen to any of us. That way, we'd quit treading water and do something with our lives."
The perfume, all those dead whales in the cuts in her hands, it stings.
Tyler says, "Cool."
The medical waste dump sounds like hitting bottom.
In South America, Land of Enchantment, we could be wading in a river where tiny fish will swim up Tyler's urethra. The fish have barbed spines that flare out and back so once they're up Tyler, the fish set up housekeeping and get ready to lay their eggs. In so many ways, how we spent Saturday night could be worse.
We don't go to dance clubs. Tyler says the music is so loud, especially the base tracks, that it screws with his biorhythm.
This, and the club is too loud to talk, so after a couple of drinks, everyone feels like the center of attention but completely cutoff from participating with anyone else.
Watching white moon face / The stars never feel anger / Blah, blah, blah, the end
Never, no, never had Tyler ever paid cash for anything.
Tyler goes to gyms and hotels and claims clothing out of the lost and found.
More than anything in the world right then, while Marla and I were standing in the kitchen, I didn't want Marla to open the freezer.
The best kind of collagen, Marla said, is your own fat, sucked out of your thighs, processed and cleaned and injected back into your lips, or wherever. This kind of collagen will last.
"My mother! You're spilling her all over!"
"If Marilyn Monroe was alive right now, what would she be doing? Clawing at the lid of her coffin."
I am Joe's Blood-Boiling Rage.
The insomnia distance of everything, a copy of a copy of a copy. You can't touch anything, and nothing can touch you.
Hindu cow.
Picture your gut chakra opening in a slow-motion explosion of sausage-casing small intestine.
Tyler's words coming out of my mouth. I used to be such a nice person.
"The good news," Big Bob says, "is there's a new group, but the first rule about this new group is you aren't supposed to talk about it."
Marla lives on the meals that Meals on Wheels delivers for her neighbors who are dead; Marla accepts the meals and says they're asleep.
Marla tells me how in the wild you don't see old animals because as soon as they age, animals die.
So I was sitting on the paper belt in an examining room at the medical school while a medical student sprays a canister of liquid nitrogen on my dick and eight medical students watched.
 I comb my hair in the mirror before work every morning and think how I once had cancer for ten minutes, worse than cancer.
My French-Canadian grand-mother was so modest that she never wore a swimming suit in public and she always ran water in the sink to mask any sound she might make in the bathroom.
The cancer I don't have is everywhere now.
There are a lot of things we don't want to know about the people we love.
This is why I loved the support groups so much, if people thought you were dying, they gave you their full attention.
Marla's philosophy of life, she told me, is that she can die at any moment. The tragedy of her life is that she doesn't.
If she was going to die, Marla didn't want to know about it.
"Disaster is a natural part of my evolution," Tyler whispered, "toward tragedy and dissolution."
"I'm breaking my attachment to physical power and possessions,' Tyler whispered, "because only through destroying myself can I discover the greater power of my spirit."
"The liberator who destroys my property," Tyler said, "is fighting to save my spirit. The teacher who clears all possessions from my path will set me free."
"Tell him," Tyler whispered. "Yes, you did it. You blew it all up. That's what he wants to hear."
That was my whole life. Everything, the lamps, the chairs, the rugs were me. The dishes in the cabinets were me. The plants were me. The television was me. It was me that blew up.
Tyler had nothing to lose. Tyler was the pawn of the world, everybody's trash.
I am Joe's Smirking Revenge.
I've committed a terrible crime against humanity as part of a political protest. My protest is over the exploitation of workers in the service industry.
I roundhouse the fist at the centrifugal force end of my arm and slam fresh blood out of the cracked scabs in my nose.
This isn't such a hard punch. I punch myself, again.
Tyler would know, but the first rule about Project Mayhem is you don't ask questions about Project Mayhem.
If you get arrested, you're off the Assault Committee. If you laugh, you're off the committee.
Everyone wanted to ask if it was loaded, but the second rule of Project Mayhem is you don't ask questions.
Maybe we should always assume the worst.
The third rule in Project Mayhem is no excuses.
The fourth rule is no lies.
The goal was to teach each man in the project that he had the power to control history.
Since most of my face never gets a chance to heal, I've got nothing to lose in the looks department.
Tyler told me later that he'd never seen me destroy something so completely. That night, Tyler knew he had to take fight club up a notch or shut it down.
If it's your first night in fight club, you have to fight. I knew that so I tagged him because the insomnia was on again, and I was in a mood to destroy something beautiful.
Pounding that kid, I really wanted to put a bullet between the eyes every endangered panda that wouldn't screw to save its species and every whale or dolphin that gave up and ran itself aground.
I wanted to destroy everything beautiful I'd never have.
Open the dump valves on super-tankers and uncap offshore oil wells. I wanted to kill all the fish I couldn't afford nor eat, and smother the French beaches I'd never see.
And I have to foot the bill for nuclear waste and buried gasoline tanks and land-filled toxic sludge dumped a generation before I was born.
Birds and deer are a silly luxury, and all the fish should be floating.
I wanted to burn the Louvre. I'd do the Elgin Marbles with a sledgehammer and wipe my ass with the Mona Lisa. This is my world, now.
This is my world, my world, and those ancient people are dead.
We wanted to blast the world free of history.
We were eating breakfast in the house on Paper Street, and Tyler said, picture yourself planting radishes and seed potatoes on the fifteenth green of a forgotten golf course.
You'll hunt elk through the damp canyon forests around the ruins of Rockefeller Center, and dig clams next to the skeleton of the Space Needle leaning at a forty-five-degree angle.
We'll paint the skyscrapers with huge totem faces and goblin tikis, and every evening what's left of mankind will retreat to empty zoos and lock itself in cages as protection against bears and big cats and wolves that pace and watch us from outside the cage bars at night.
"Recycling and speed limits are bullshit," Tyler said. "They're like someone who quits smoking on his deathbed."
A cultural ice age. A prematurely induced dark age. Project Mayhem will force humanity to go dormant or into remission long enough for the Earth to recover.
"You justify anarchy," Tyler says. "You figure it out."
Like fight club does with clerks and box boys, Project Mayhem will break up civilization so we can, make something better out of the world.
"Stalking elk past department store windows and stinking racks of beautiful rotting dresses and tuxedos on hangers; you'll wear leather clothes that will last you the rest of your life, and you'll climb the wrist-thick kudzu vines that wrap the Sears Tower. Jack and the beanstalk, you'll climb up through the dripping forest canopy and the air will be so clean you'll see tiny figures pounding corn and laying strips of venison to dry in the empty car pool lane of an abandoned superhighway stretching eight-lanes-wide and August-hot for a thousand miles."
The fifth rule about Project Mayhem is you have to trust Tyler.
I don't even wear a tie anymore.
One pair of heavy black shoes. Two pair of black socks and two pair of plain underwear. One heavy black coat.
"If the applicant is young, we tell him he's too young. If he's fat, he's too fat. If he's old, he's too old."
The rule in Project Mayhem is you have to trust Tyler.
I hug the walls, being a mouse trapped in this clockwork of silent men with the energy of trained monkeys, cooking and working and sleeping in teams.
At any time of the night, space monkeys from some slaughterhouse come home with bags of blood meal to boost the iron in the soil and bone meal to boost the phosphorus.
And while I'm at work, teams of space monkeys dig up the muddy lawn around the house and cut the dirt with Epsom salts to lower the acidity, and spade in loads of free steer manure from the stockyards and bags of hair clippings from barber shops to ward off moles and mice and boost the protein in the soil.
Teams of space monkeys plant basil and thyme and lettuce and starts of witch hazel and eucalyptus and mock orange and mint in a kaleidoscope knot pattern.
Another team of space monkeys picks only the most perfect leaves and juniper berries to boil for a natural dye.
The rose, Marla tells me, is a natural astringent.
Some of the plants have obituary names: Iris, Basil, Rue, Rosemary, and Verbena. Some, like meadow sweet and cows lips, sweet flag and spikenard, are like the names of Shakespeare fairies.
The space monkey rakes the path behind him to erase our ever being there.
Tyler's rented house on Paper Street is a living thing wet on the inside from so many people sweating and breathing.
"You are not a beautiful and unique snowflake. You are the same decaying organic matter as everyone else, and we are all part of the same compost pile."
"Our culture has made us all the same. No one is truly white or black or rich, anymore. We all want the same. Individually, we are nothing."
I am Joe's Broken Heart because Tyler's dumped me. Because my father dumped me. Oh, I could go on and on.
Is it true, everybody asks. Is Tyler Durden building an army? That's the word.
Does Tyler Durden only sleep one hour a night?
I am Joe's Complete Lack of Surprise.
Here, I'm not sure if Tyler is my dream. Or if I am Tyler's dream.
Skinny guys, they never go limp. They fight until they're burger.
"If you're male and you're Christian and living in America, your father is your model for God. And if you never know your father, if your father bails out or dies or is never at home, what do you believe about God?"
"What you have to consider," he says, "is the possibility that God doesn't like you. Could be, God hates us. This is not the worst thing that can happen."
We are God's middle children, according to Tyler Durden, with no special place in history and no special attention.
Which is worse, hell or nothing?
Only if we're caught and punished can we be saved.
"As long as you're at fight club, you're not how much money you've got in the bank. You're not your job. You're not your family, and you're not who you tell yourself. You're not your name. You're not your problems. You're not your age. You're not your hopes."
The headlights are flashing high and low and high in your face, and you will never have to go to work again. You will never have to get another haircut.
"Make Mine Veal."
"Drunk Drivers Against Mothers."
"Recycle All the Animals."
I never, no, never told anyone this, but before I met Tyler, I was planning to buy a dog and name it "Entourage."
The amazing miracle of death, when one second you're walking and talking, and the next second, you're an object.
One thing I'll have to learn before the end of civilization is how to look at the stars and tell where I'm going.
"I see the strongest and the smartest men who have ever lived, and these men are pumping gas and waiting tables."
"All a gun does is focus an explosion in one direction."
"You have a class of young strong men and women, and they want to give their lives to something."
"Advertising has these people chasing cars and clothes they don't need. Generations have been working in jobs they hate, just so they can buy what they don't really need."
"We don't have a great war in our generation, or a great depression, but we do, we have a great war of the spirit. We have a great revolution against the culture. The great depression is our lives. We have a spiritual depression."
"We have to show these men and women freedom by enslaving them, and show them courage by frightening them."
"Imagine hunting elk through the damp canyon forests around the ruins of Rockefeller Center."
"Fat," the mechanic says, "liposuctioned fat sucked out of the richest thighs in America. The richest, fattest thighs in the world."
Our goal is the big red bags of liposuctioned fat we'll haul back to Paper Street and render and mix with lye and rosemary and sell back to the very people who paid to have it sucked out.
One minute, you're a person, the next minute, you're an object, and Mom and Dad would have to call old doctor whoever and get your dental records because there wouldn't be much left of your face, and Mom and Dad, they'd always expected so much more from you and, no, life wasn't fair, and now it was come to this.
In three months, and then in six months, and then in a year, and if you aren't back in school on your way to being a veterinarian, you will be dead.
I'm watching you, Raymond Hessel, and I'd rather kill you than see you working a shit job for just enough money to buy cheese and watch television.
Everybody in Project Mayhem is part of Tyler Durden, and vice versa.
Raymond K. K. Hessel, your dinner is going to taste better than any meal you've ever eaten, and tomorrow will be the most beautiful day of your entire life.
But have they seen Tyler Durden? They say, never heard of him, sir.
There are guys with sideways noses, and these guys at the bar see me with the puckered hole in my cheek and we're an instant family.
If you can wake up in a different place. If you can wake up in a different time. Why can't you wake up as a different person?
Every bar you go into, punched-out guys want to buy you a beer. And no, sir, they've never met this Tyler Durden. And they wink.
The space monkeys are using lye to burn off their fingerprints.
"You're such a flake. You love me. You ignore me. You save my life, then you cook my mother into soap."
Marla says, "Tyler Durden. Your name is Tyler Butt Wipe for Brains Durden."
Tyler's telling me this, but somehow, I already know it.
"The people you're trying to step on, we're everyone you depend on. We're the people who do your laundry and cook your food and serve your dinner. We make your bed. We guard you while you're asleep. We drive the ambulances. We direct your call. We are cooks and taxi drivers and we know everything about you. We process your insurance claims and credit card charges. We control every part of your life."
"We are the middle children of history, raised by television to believe that someday we'll be millionaires and movie stars and rock stars, but we won't. And we're just learning this fact."
Marla loves you.
"I am the all-singing, all-dancing crap of this world,"
"I am the toxic waste byproduct of God's creation."
And a moment was the most you could ever expect from perfection.
The IBM Stellar Sphere. The Philip Morris Galaxy. Planet Denny's. Every planet will take on the corporate identity of whoever rapes it first.
You can imagine you smell urine in everybody's soup.
On a long enough time line, everyone's survival rate drops to zero.
"His name is Robert Paulson."
Only in death will we have our own names since only in death are we no longer part of the effort. In death we become heroes.
I am the Pit of Joe's Stomach.
I know this because Tyler knows this.
Barium nitrate in a sauce of sulfur and garnished with charcoal. That's your basic gunpowder.
"You know the drill, Mr. Durden. You said it yourself. You said, if anyone ever tries to shut down the club, even you, then we have to get him by the nuts."
The mechanic says, "You told us you'd probably say that."
Don't picture the windowsill as a dull hot knife slitting open your belly.
There was maple flooring once. There was art on the walls before the explosion. There was Swedish furniture. Before Tyler.
Up here, in the miles of night between the stars and the Earth, I feel just like one of those space animals.
An overdose shot of sodium phenobarbital, and then the big sleep. Valley of the Dogs style.
To everybody there, I am Tyler Durden the Great and Powerful. God and father.
And what happens doesn't happen in words. I want to smother all the French beaches I'll never see.
Imagine stalking elk through the damp canyon forests around Rockefeller Center.
I am Ozymandias, king of kings.
And in the basement of the Armory Bar, Tyler Durden slips to the floor in a warm jumble. Tyler Durden the great, who was perfect for one moment, and who said that a moment is the most you could ever expect from perfection.
Tyler's standing there, perfectly handsome and an angel in his everythingblond way. My will to live amazes me.
To God, this looks like one man alone, holding a gun in his own mouth, but it's Tyler holding the gun, and it's my life.
I am Joe's Hard Drive.
Marla likes Tyler.
I've met God across his long walnut desk with his diplomas hanging on the wall behind him, and God asks me, "Why?"
We are not special. We are not crap or trash, either. We just are. We just are, and what happens just happens.
